an investigation has revealed the
Israeli Army has been using an untested
AI base tool for its bombing campaign in
Gaza the online magazine plus 972 found
the software known as lavender had
listed as many as 37,000 Palestinian men
as targets the Israeli Army also judged
it impermissible to kill more than a 100
civilians in attacks if the target was a
top ranking Hamas official well let's
speak to Anthony Lowenstein about this
is an independent journalist who wrote a
book on Israel's arms and surveillance
industry called the Palestine laboratory
he's joining us from Sydney Anthony
thank you so much for being with us so
you wrote this book about uh Israeli
Army tactics and arms can I ask you
first how widespread is the use of
artificial intelligence in Israel's
current war in Gaza and what effects
it's having on the Army's conduct on the
ground it's ubiquitous is the short
answer it was used by Israel before
October 7 in previous Wars in Gaza but
it's massively accelerated since and
there's been two reports by the author
you just mentioned jual Abraham who's an
Israeli journalist who talks about the
extensive use of AI by Israel in Gaza
since October 7 and also matches some of
the reporting and sources I've been
speaking to the short version is that
that story goes into great depth about
how essentially there was an attempt to
kill huge numbers of low-level Hamas
operatives and the question of course
was made how is that decision being
decided is it being made by humans is it
being made by machine that report states
that at many times huge numbers of
thousands upon thousands of lowlevel
operatives and it's worth saying how
that operative is defined is not clear
and there are a lot of Israeli officials
in that story that say that at times
only 20 seconds at best was given to
every so-called Target that was offered
to the military in other words massive
numbers of people would deem to be
Expendable could be killed and one of
the key points of that story that I
think is so damaging to Israel apart
from the massive civilian death toll
which we've seen in the last six months
is that there's no proportionality in
fact this is the opposite of that
International lawyers have said in the
last 24 hours since this report came out
that in fact this is the key problem for
Israel here that there was an attempt as
the story itself says for Revenge
Revenge is not international law revenge
is
illegality interesting I was going to
ask you what you know international law
says about the use of such tools uh in
in war and this specific tool but also
the the human supervision aspect of it
is is this tool supervised on the
ground well the short answer is no and
that became very clear in that report
that huge amounts of targets are
generated and that information's coming
from Israeli sources human sources my
suspicions is American intelligence
sources potentially also Australian
because Pine gap which is a major US
military base in the cent of Australia
was also used by the us to give
information to Israel all this
information feeds into a system and it
spews out massive amounts of targets and
the problem is that the Rules of
Engagement are so loose as this peace
states that families of these alleged
militants are killed civilians women
women men ET even you know non-militant
children and that's a problem because
the death toll particularly in the first
months was so staggering I me I think 15
20,000 in the first few months and
there's no evidence in fact by the way
any of these people have any connection
to terrorism zero and we've seen the
impact on Gaza right it's been leveled
which of course has been the point as
this report states that was the most uh
shocking aspect of the report for me the
amount of collateral damage Israeli
military was willing to accept when
killing just one command Commander or or
two commanders now coming back to some
other reports in the Israeli media uh
following the killing of these Aid
workers which have suggested that
there's a lack of discipline within uh
the Israeli military that's operating in
Gaza right now is it a lack of
discipline per se where where you know
commanders on the ground are not obeying
orders or is it more a case of the
commanders on the ground setting the
rules for the
themselves it's a combination of both I
mean this sort of lack of real um moral
ethical legal barriers existed long
before October 7 there huge amounts of
examples in the last years of Israel
essentially committing Mass Slaughter in
Gaza and frankly at times in the West
Bank and there's no accountability for
these crimes which of course is why they
continue to happen I think also it goes
to a broader point about Israeli Society
something I've written about for years
having lived there for quite a long time
is that there is a culture of
dehumanization of Palestinians so if you
don't see Palestinians as human beings
or as equal if you kill 15 20 30 40,000
who cares it's justified in that mindset
putting aside the illegality of those
orders it's also worth saying that after
these reports about AI enabled Warfare
in the last months and this ties into
what I've written about in my book
Israel is currently trying to sell these
tools to foreign entities two
governments that are looking to what
Israel is doing in Gaza not with discust
but actually with admiration and we'll
find out in the coming months and years
who they may be but my sense is it's
going to be countries that are currently
saying they're opposed to what Israel is
doing but in fact are looking to engage
those tools in their own conflicts and
wars in their own countries interesting
it'll be interesting to see what
international law says about all this as
as AI tools evolve and so on thank you
very much for talking to us Anthony loen
uh author of the book The Palestine
laboratory joining us there from Sydney
it was very interesting to talk to you
thank you thank you